tial, since many of the lesions treated
by this method are decidedly uncommon. Eventually, this collaboration
may make it possible for us to standardize techniques or even undertake
prospective clinical trials.
Michael R. McKenzie, MD
Radiation Oncology
BC Cancer Agency
Vancouver Cancer Centre
Vancouver, BC
Reference
1. Firlik KS, Kondziolka D, Lunsford LD,
Janecka IP, Flickinger JC. Radiosurgery
for recurrent cranial base cancer arising
from the head and neck. Head Neck
1996;18(2):160-5.
Over the last decade the use of
stereotactic radiosurgery has increased worldwide as an important,
minimally invasive surgical treatment. However, radiosurgery has developed much more slowly in Canada
than in other countries, despite the
prominence of Canadian experts in
neurosurgery and radiation oncology.
As Dr. Schwartz states, the application of any technology is dependent on operator skill, and one component of that skill relates to
experience. The issue is how patients
and physicians can assess level of
technical expertise, particularly for
novel treatments such as radiosurgery.
To Schwartz’s description of the
basic aspects of each technology we
would add the comment that investigators comparing the physics of the
Gamma Knife and the linear accelerator found that dose plans were
better with the Gamma Knife.1,2
With regard to fractionation and
radiosurgery, the literature argues for
single-fraction radiosurgery for arteriovenous malformations and benign
tumours.3,4 Hall and Brenner3 recommended fractionation for malignant
tumours, acknowledging that good
results can be obtained with radiosurgical treatment for malignant lesions
of the brain.
Canadian physicians must recommend treatments on the basis of
safety, efficacy and cost-effectiveness.
Until physicians and their patients
have some understanding of the
safety and efficacy of radiosurgery in
Canada, we caution against the blanket denials of provincial health plans
to Canadian patients who, on the recommendation of their physicians,
choose to receive such care outside
Canada.
Douglas Kondziolka, MD, MSc
Associate Professor
Neurological Surgery and Radiation 
Oncology
Department of Neurological Surgery
Presbyterian University Hospital
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, Pa.
Michael D. Cusimano, MD
Associate Professor of Neurosurgery
Division of Neurosurgery
St. Michael’s Hospital
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ont.
Disclosure: Dr. Kondziolka is a
consultant for Elekta Instruments, Inc.
References
1. Verhey LJ, Smith V, Serago CF. Comparison of radiosurgery treatment modalities
based on physical dose distributions. Int J
Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1998;40:497-505.
2. Smith V, Verhey LJ, Serago CF. Comparison of radiosurgery treatment modalities
based on complication and control probabilities. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1998;40:507-13.
3. Hall E, Brenner D. The radiobiology of
radiosurgery: rationale for different treatment regimens for AVMs and malignancies. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1993;25:381-5.
4. Larson D, Flickinger J, Loeffler J. The radiobiology of radiosurgery. Int J Radiat
Oncol Biol Phys 1993;25:557-61.
[The author responds:]
What Drs. Kondziolka and
Cusimano refer to as the
“slow” development of radiosurgery
in Canada really represents a cautious
approach and a desire to rigorously
define the indications for radiosurgery, so that no patient is subjected to unnecessary treatment.
For physics comparisons, I would
call attention to a report of poor correspondence between calculated dose
and measured radiation effect for the
Gamma Knife1 (Fig. 3 in that article)
and the good correspondence reported by our centre2 (Fig. 2 in that
article).
I certainly agree that “Canadian
physicians must recommend treatments on the basis of safety, efficacy
and cost-effectiveness.” With these
criteria, they may very well choose
treatment in Canada.
Michael Schwartz, MD, MSc
Head, Division of Neurosurgery
Sunnybrook Health Science Centre
Associate Professor
Department of Surgery
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ont.
References
1. Flickinger JC, Lunsford LD, Wu A, Maitz
AH, Kalend AM. Treatment planning for
Gamma Knife radiosurgery with multiple
isocenters. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys
1990;18(1):1495-501.
2. Ramani R, O’Brien PF, Davey P,
Schwartz ML, Young CS, Lightstone AW,
et al. Implementation of multiple isocentre
treatment for dynamic radiosurgery. Br J
Radiol 1995;68:731-5.
Correspondance
15512 August 11/98 CMAJ /Page 220
220 JAMC • 11 AOÛT 1998; 159 (3)
Docket: 1-5512 Initial: JN
Customer: CMAJ Aug 11/98
Où que vous soyez
Gardez
contact
www.cma.ca